Short communication: A cluster of Marburg virus disease
involving an infant*
Matthias Borchert1, Jean Jacques Muyembe-Tamfum2, Robert Colebunders3, Modeste Libande4,
Mulangu Sabue2 and Patrick Van der Stuyft1
1 Epidemiology Unit, Department of Public Health, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium
2 Institut de Recherche Biome
´dicale, Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo
3 Department of Clinical Sciences, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium
4 Ministry of Health, Democratic Republic of Congo
Summary
A noteworthy cluster of six cases of Marburg haemorrhagic fever (MHF) was identiﬁed in the
Democratic Republic of Congo. One of the cases is the ﬁrst infant Marburg fever patient ever
documented. Three of six cases presented surprisingly mild symptoms. The results of epidemiological
and virological investigations are compatible with person-to-person transmission through body ﬂuids
and with mother-to-child transmission while nurturing. The ﬁndings show that mild cases of MHF have
to be expected during an outbreak and point out the difﬁculty to base patient management decisions on
clinical case deﬁnitions alone.
keywords Marburg haemorrhagic fever, ﬁloviridae, active surveillance, outbreak control,
Democratic Republic of Congo
correspondence Matthias Borchert, Epidemiology Unit, Department of Public Health, Institute of
Tropical Medicine, Nationalestraat 155, 2000 Antwerpen, Belgium. Fax: +32 3 24 76 258; E-mail:
mborchert@itg.be
Introduction
Between October 1998 and May 1999, an outbreak of
Marburg haemorrhagic fever (MHF) occurred in Durba
and Watsa in the north-east corner of the Democratic
Republic of Congo, a region marked by economic decline
and the ongoing armed conﬂict. The outbreak caused 73
cases and 61 deaths (own data) and was the ﬁrst MHF
epidemic ever observed in a community setting; gold
diggers appeared to be particularly affected (WHO 1999).
In the past, Marburg virus had only been implicated in
laboratory outbreaks in Germany and Yugoslavia (1967)
among individuals who had handled monkeys imported
from Uganda (Martini 1971; Stille & Bo
¨hle 1971;
Todorovitch et al. 1971; Slenczka 1999), and in isolated
cases in East, Central and Southern Africa (Gear et al.
1975; Smith et al. 1982; Johnson et al. 1996). During the
Durba outbreak, we identiﬁed a particularly noteworthy
family cluster of suspected and conﬁrmed cases, which we
were able to document in detail.
Methods
Upon arrival of a team of national and international
experts for the investigation and control of the epidemic in
early May 1999 – several months after the beginning of the
outbreak – an active surveillance system was set up in
Durba and Watsa, with health workers and trained
volunteers making house-to-house visits to look for inci-
dent cases suspected to be MHF.
The following case deﬁnitions were used by the surveil-
lance teams: a clinical case was any severely ill person with
acute fever and at least one of the following signs of
haemorrhage: haematemesis, bloody diarrhoea or melaena,
gingival bleeding. Clinical cases were taken to the isolation
unit for assessment by a physician, who would decide on
diagnosis and isolation on epidemiological and clinical
grounds. Suspect cases were (a) ill persons with a risk
proﬁle (being gold diggers or having had contact with
another suspect case in the past 3 weeks) with acute fever
*On behalf of the International Scientiﬁc and Technical Com-
mittee for Marburg Haemorrhagic Fever Control in the Demo-
cratic Republic of Congo.
Tropical Medicine and International Health
volume 7 no 10 pp 902–906 october 2002
902
ª 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd
not responding to treatment with antibiotics and antima-
larial drugs, or (b) ill persons with a risk proﬁle presenting
at least three of the following symptoms: headache,
vomiting, nausea, anorexia, diarrhoea, asthenia, abdom-
inal pain, generalized pain, dysphagia, dyspnoea, cough,
thoracic pain. Suspect cases were followed-up daily for
3 days, had a blood sample taken and were transported to
the isolation unit if their health status became worse or if
signs of haemorrhage developed.
Two serosurveys were conducted among the staff of the
Watsa and Durba health facilities: the ﬁrst on 10 May
1999 and the second on 21 July 2001.
Blood samples of clinical and suspect cases were shipped
to the National Institute of Virology, Johannesburg, where
a range of tests was undertaken: polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) (Sanchez & Feldmann 1995), antigen capture
enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) (Ksiazek
et al. 1992), IgG and IgM ELISA (Ksiazek et al. 1999) and
virus isolation. Because of the remoteness of the area and
infrequent transport opportunities for the samples, labor-
atory results often arrived in the ﬁeld too late to be relevant
for case management. Serosurvey samples were tested for
anti-Marburg IgG and IgM by ELISA.
Results
Like most cases of the outbreak, the ﬁrst two cases of the
cluster were identiﬁed retrospectively after the arrival of
the investigation team. A, a young gold digger, fell ill with
fever, subsequently developed signs of haemorrhage and
eventually died within days. His clothes, soiled with body
ﬂuids, were washed by B, approximately 25 years old and
4 months pregnant. On 22 April 1999, she became ill with
high fever, headache, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting
and malaise. On 24 April, she was hospitalized, had a
spontaneous abortion and died of vaginal haemorrhage. As
A and B were retrospective cases, no biological samples
could be taken; the case ascertainment was based on
exposure factors and clinical symptoms reported by mem-
bers of B’s family (for A: working as a gold digger; for B:
prior contact with another case; for both: acute fever and
haemorrhagic symptoms).
On 15 May, the death of C, a 40-year-old female, was
reported to the investigation team of the Marburg epi-
demic; she had died at home the day before. C turned out
to be the mother of B whom she had been nursing during
the 3 days of her illness. From 1 May onwards, C had
developed high fever, haematemesis, diarrhoea, headache,
abdominal pain, myalgia, arthralgia, dysphagia, dyspnoea
and conjunctivitis. A post-mortem cardiac puncture was
undertaken. This sample, processed at the National Insti-
tute of Virology, Johannesburg, South Africa (like all other
samples reported here), was Marburg positive by PCR,
antigen capture ELISA and virus isolation, but no Marburg
antibodies were found by ELISA.
Furthermore, when C’s case history and contacts were
investigated, two more family members were found ill,
although not severely: (1) D (age 22), B’s sister, had been ill
since 1 May, with unspeciﬁc signs and symptoms. She was
not sure whether she had seen traces of blood in the stool;
slight signs of purpura could be found. (2) E (age 8 months),
D’s daughter, who suffered from fever, diarrhoea and
vomiting since 9 May. Splenomegaly, but no signs or
haemorrhage were found in the child. Both D and E had
reportedly not been seriously ill before the assessment by
the investigation team. D had, like C, given nursing care to
B. E received maternal care and was breastfed by D; E had
not been in close contact with C. None of them had been in
contact with another case of haemorrhagic fever outside the
family. Venous blood was taken from D and E. While D
fulﬁlled the ﬁeld-case deﬁnition (prior contact with another
case, acute fever and haemorrhagic symptoms), E initially
did not; when re-interviewed two and a half years later, the
family claimed to have seen traces of blood in E’s stool. In
the absence of laboratory results – which became available
much later – E’s initial clinical diagnosis was malaria, and
considerable doubt surrounded the diagnoses of D because
of the mildness of her disease. So neither were hospitalized
in the isolation unit that had been installed upon arrival of
the international team. Both recovered within one more
week and survived.
Eventually, and somewhat surprisingly, Marburg
genome was identiﬁed by PCR in the specimens of both D
and E. Marburg virus could be isolated from D’s blood
only, possibly because of high storage temperatures of E’s
specimen. Antigen capture ELISA and serology were
negative for both. The base pair sequences identiﬁed in
specimens from D and E were identical with the one found
in C. Two and a half years later, D and E were found
healthy and positive for Marburg IgG.
F, a midwife at Watsa General Hospital, was negative
for Marburg IgG on 10 May 1999, but had seroconverted
in July 2001. The hospital register revealed that she had
assisted B during her abortion on 24 April 1999. F told us
that only one glove was available to her. She does not recall
having been ill after her contact with B, but claims to suffer
from malaria (fever, arthralgia) frequently. F denies to
have cared for Marburg cases after the 1998–1999
outbreak.
Discussion
The diagnosis of MHF in the two retrospective cases A and
B is based on strong epidemiological evidence and reported
Tropical Medicine and International Health
volume 7 no 10 pp 902–906 october 2002
M. Borchert et al.
Marburg disease involving infant
ª 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd
903
 13653156, 2002, 10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1365-3156.2002.00945.x by Test, Wiley Online Library on [01/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
clinical symptoms, without laboratory conﬁrmation; this is
a limitation of the study. During an outbreak, the
speciﬁcity of a case deﬁnition based on clinical and
epidemiological evidence, as found in A and B, can be
assumed to be reasonably high, particularly as no sample
collected during the outbreak was found positive for
another current viral haemorrhagic fever infection such as
yellow fever, Crimean-Congo HF, etc. Diagnoses such as
malaria for A or septic abortion for B, however, cannot be
completely ruled out. For the incident cases C, D and E,
there is no doubt about their diagnosis of Marburg HF. For
F, epidemiological and serological evidence is also strong:
her ﬁrst, negative blood sample was taken only 16 days
after presumed transmission, probably too early to detect
an IgG antibody response; 2 years later she was seropos-
itive, the exposure to Marburg virus during B’s abortion
being the only contact that could be identiﬁed.
The description of symptoms in the fatal cases A, B and
C, and of symptoms in surviving cases D and E prior to
assessment by the investigation team relies on reports by
patient D and by other family members. As no obvious
advantage could be expected from being classiﬁed as a
Marburg case, we assume that reported symptoms were
not exaggerated or biased towards MHF-speciﬁc ones.
There is more reason to suspect that they may have been
downplayed, fearing hospitalization in the isolation ward.
However, the concerned family was perceived as being
trustworthy and we do not have speciﬁc reasons to doubt
their reports. The mildness of disease in D and E before and
after the encounter with the investigation team is plausible
given that they both have survived. F was interviewed in
depth 2.5 years after her Marburg infection. She may have
been asymptomatic, or may have suffered from mild
disease without remembering, but we assume that severe
disease would not have escaped her memory.
This cluster is interesting in several aspects: First, E is the
ﬁrst conﬁrmed paediatric case of Marburg virus disease ever
documented and also the only conﬁrmed paediatric case in
the Durba outbreak. The fact that children are underrep-
resented was found in other ﬁlovirus haemorrhagic fever
epidemics too, e.g. the Ebola outbreaks in Kikwit (DRC)
1995 (Dowell 1996), but it remains speculative whether this
suggests that children are rarely infected, or whether
paediatric cases are underreported, possibly because they
tend to be less severe, are more easily confused with other
differential diagnoses, or simply get less attention.
Secondly, given an incubation period of 5–10 days
(Centers of Disease Control and Prevention 2000), and
including the two unconﬁrmed cases identiﬁed retrospec-
tively, this cluster could correspond to four generations of
Marburg cases (Figure 1), a number of generations that has
not been documented before. It also constitutes the most
important cluster of conﬁrmed cases in this major outbreak
in Watsa and Durba.
Thirdly, half of the cases had subjectively mild disease or
may have been asymptomatic. These cases may easily be
overlooked, even by active surveillance, if surveillance
ofﬁcers concentrate on impressive cases with frank
haemorrhage. Mild cases may play a role in transmission, as
was the case in this cluster from D to her child E. On the
other hand, mild MHF is particularly difﬁcult to distinguish
from other, more frequent diagnoses on clinical grounds
alone, without MHF-speciﬁc diagnostic tests in place. Lack
of sensitivity of the case deﬁnition may lead to inappro-
priate control of human-to-human transmission, lack of
speciﬁcity may overburden health services already stretched
to their limit and may increase the incidence of transmission
from true to false MHF patients in the isolation ward.
Fourthly, within this cluster, severity of disease and
fatality appear to be decreasing with the number of
passages through humans: the ﬁrst, second and one of the
third generation cases died, while the other third genera-
tion cases and the fourth generation case survived. For all
earlier outbreaks together (referenced in the introduction),
the case fatality proportion can be calculated to be 10 of 29
in primary cases, but 0 of 9 in secondary cases (P ¼ 0.08,
Fisher’s exact test). These observations are consistent with
the speculation that the virus might become attenuated
during its passage through humans.
Fifthly, our epidemiological and virological data are
compatible with the prevailing hypothesis, generated dur-
ing the Durba outbreak, that gold diggers are – for
unknown reasons – particularly at risk for primary infection
(WHO 1999), and that they can be at the origin of
subsequent person-to-person transmission within house-
holds (and, to a lesser extent, in health facilities). We
suspect that the index case in our cluster, A, had been
infected in the gold mine. It seems plausible that the adult
women B, C and D were infected because of contact with
body ﬂuids while washing soiled cloths or providing nursing
care. For the infant E, whose contacts were essentially
limited to his mother, D, several routes of transmission via
body ﬂuids, including breastfeeding, could be hypothesized.
While not probable, co-primary infection from a perido-
mestic reservoir like rodents, however, cannot be excluded
for C, D and E, who all lived in the same household.
Because of resource constraints, the collection of rodents,
bats and other candidate reservoir hosts was limited to
Gorumbwa gold mine and its surroundings, where the
majority of primary transmission to man is hypothesized to
have occurred; no trace of Marburg virus, however, could
be found in the animals (Zeller 2000). F is one of the several
cases of occupational Marburg infection during the out-
break in Watsa and Durba.
Tropical Medicine and International Health
volume 7 no 10 pp 902–906 october 2002
M. Borchert et al.
Marburg disease involving infant
904
ª 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd
 13653156, 2002, 10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1365-3156.2002.00945.x by Test, Wiley Online Library on [01/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
In summary, our ﬁndings indicate that community
outbreaks of MHF can affect infants, illustrate that during
such outbreaks mild cases are likely to occur, as was the case
in the non-community outbreaks in Europe. They also
indicate that person-to-person transmission may be more
common than ascertained by standard active surveillance.
During an epidemic of MHF, one should also look out for
mild cases fulﬁlling the case deﬁnition, whom one may have
to isolate in order to avoid further secondary spread of the
virus. The ﬁndings point out that it is difﬁcult to base patient
management decisions on a clinical case deﬁnition alone:
patients may correspond to it but have such mild symptoms
that clinicians fail to adhere to the deﬁnition and decline
isolation (case D), patients may refuse isolation given the
mildness of disease, the deﬁnition itself may lack sensitivity
(cases E and F). This underlines the advantage of having
speciﬁc VHF diagnostics in the ﬁeld during an outbreak;
that this is feasible, in principle, was demonstrated during
the Ebola outbreak in Uganda 2000–2001 (WHO 2001).
Acknowledgements
MB and RC were part of the Me
´decins Sans Frontie
`res
team during the Marburg Haemorrhagic Fever outbreak in
Durba; their mission was funded by MSF. We are grateful
to Prof. Robert Swanepoel and his team for carrying out all
laboratory investigations at the National Institute for
Virology, Johannesburg, South Africa.
References
Centers of Disease Control and Prevention (2000) Disease Infor-
mation: Marburg Haemorrhagic Fever. http://www.cdc.gov/
ncidod/dvrd/spb/mnpages/dispages/marburg.htm, accessed 27/
02/02.
Dowell SF (1996) Ebola haemorrhagic fever: why were children
spared? Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal 15, 189–191.
Gear JSS, Cassel GA, Gear AJ et al. (1975) Outbreak of Marburg
virus disease in Johannesburg. British Medical Journal 4, 489–493.
Generation of cases
1
A    , approx. 30, male
Risk factor: gold digger in Durba
Symptoms and outcome: fever, haematemesis; death
2
B  ,19, female, acquaintance of A.
Risk factor: washed A's clothes soiled with body fluids
Symptoms and outcome: fever, abortion, vaginal haemorrhage; death 
3
F, 50, female, midwife at Watsa General Hospital
Risk factor: gave obstetric care to B. without appropriate protection
Symptoms and outcome: possibly fever; survival
C, 40, female, mother of B.
Risk factor: nursed B.
Symptoms and outcome: fever, haematemesis; death
D, 22, female, sister of B.
Risk factor: nursed B.
Symptoms and outcome: fever, purpura, melaena?; survival
4
E, 8 months, female, daughter of D.
Risk factor: cared for and breastfed by D.
Symptoms and outcome: fever, traces of blood in stool?; survival
21
29 1
5
12
19
26
1 3
10
17
24
April 1999
May 1999
C, D and E seen by investigation team on May 15
¶
*
Period when transmission probably occurred
Most likely route of transmission
Not laboratory confirmed case
Minimum incubation period
Clinical disease
Possible alternative route of transmission
Approximate dates of onset and death
¶* 
¶
Generation of cases
1
A    , approx. 30, male
Risk factor: gold digger in Durba
Symptoms and outcome: fever, haematemesis; death
2
B  ,19, female, acquaintance of A.
Risk factor: washed A's clothes soiled with body fluids
Symptoms and outcome: fever, abortion, vaginal haemorrhage; death 
3
F, 50, female, midwife at Watsa General Hospital
Risk factor: gave obstetric care to B. without appropriate protection
Symptoms and outcome: possibly fever; survival
C, 40, female, mother of B.
Risk factor: nursed B.
Symptoms and outcome: fever, haematemesis; death
D, 22, female, sister of B.
Risk factor: nursed B.
Symptoms and outcome: fever, purpura, melaena?; survival
4
E, 8 months, female, daughter of D.
Risk factor: cared for and breastfed by D.
Symptoms and outcome: fever, traces of blood in stool?; survival
21
29 1
5
12
19
26
1 3
10
17
24
April 1999
May 1999
C, D and E seen by investigation team on May 15
¶
*
Period when transmission probably occurred
Most likely route of transmission
Not laboratory confirmed case
Minimum incubation period
Clinical disease
Possible alternative route of transmission
Approximate dates of onset and death
¶* 
¶
Figure 1 Cluster of Marburg haemorrhagic fever cases involving an infant, with possible ways of transmission.
Tropical Medicine and International Health
volume 7 no 10 pp 902–906 october 2002
M. Borchert et al.
Marburg disease involving infant
ª 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd
905
 13653156, 2002, 10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1365-3156.2002.00945.x by Test, Wiley Online Library on [01/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Johnson ED, Johnson BK, Silverstein D et al. (1996)
Characterization of a new Marburg virus isolated from a 1987
fatal case in Kenya. Archives of Virology 11, 101–114.
Ksiazek TG, Rollin PE, Jahrling PB et al. (1992) Enzyme
immunosorbent assay for Ebola virus antigens in tissues of
infected primates. Journal of Clinical Microbiology 30, 947–950.
Ksiazek TG, West CP, Rollin PE, Jahrling P & Peters CJ (1999)
ELISA for the detection of antibodies to Ebola virus. Journal of
Infectious Diseases 179, S192–S198.
Martini GA (1971) Marburg virus disease: clinical syndrome. In:
Marburg Virus Disease (eds GA Martini & R Siegert), 1st edn.
Springer, Berlin, pp. 1–9.
Sanchez A & Feldmann H (1995) Detection of Marburg and Ebola
virus infections by polymerase chain reaction assays. In: PCR:
Protocols for Diagnosis of Human and Animal Virus Diseases
(eds G Darai & Y Becker). Springer, Berlin, pp. 411–419.
Slenczka WG (1999) The Marburg virus outbreak of 1967 and
subsequent episodes. In: Marburg and Ebola Viruses (ed. HD
Klenk). Springer, Berlin, pp. 49–75.
Smith DH, Johnson BK, Isaacson M et al. (1982) Marburg virus
disease in Kenya. Lancet i, 816–820.
Stille W & Bo
¨hle E (1971) Clinical course and prognosis of
Marburg virus (Green-Monkey) disease. In: Marburg Virus
Disease (eds GA Martini & R Siegert), 1st edn. Springer, Berlin,
pp. 10–18.
Todorovitch K, Mocitch M & Klasnja R (1971) Clinical picture of
two patients infected by the Marburg Vervet virus. In: Marburg
Virus Disease (eds GA Martini & R Siegert), 1st edn. Springer,
Berlin, pp. 19–23.
WHO (1999) Viral haemorrhagic fever/Marburg, Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Weekly Epidemiological Record 74,
157–158.
WHO (2001) Outbreak of Ebola haemorrhagic fever, Uganda,
August 2000–January 2001. Weekly Epidemiological Record
76, 41–46.
Zeller H (2000) Les lec
¸ons de l’e
´pide
´mie a
` virus Marburg a
` Durba,
Re
´publique De
´mocratique du Congo (1998–2000). Me
´decine
Tropicale 60, 23S–26S.
Tropical Medicine and International Health
volume 7 no 10 pp 902–906 october 2002
M. Borchert et al.
Marburg disease involving infant
906
ª 2002 Blackwell Science Ltd
 13653156, 2002, 10, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1046/j.1365-3156.2002.00945.x by Test, Wiley Online Library on [01/07/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
