LETTERS
174
Emerging Infectious Diseases • www.cdc.gov/eid • Vol. 11, No. 1, January 2005
6. Giraud E, Brisabois A, Martel JL, Chaslus-
Dancla E. Comparative studies of muta-
tions in animal isolates and experimental in
vitro- and in vivo- selected mutants of
Salmonella spp. suggest a counterselection
of highly fluororquinolone-resistant strains
in the field. Antimicrob Agents Chemother.
1999;43:2131–7.
7. Hirose K, Hashimoto A, Tamura K,
Kawamura Y, Ezaki T, Sagara H, et al.
DNA sequence analysis of DNA gyrase and
DNA topoisomerase IV quinolone resist-
ance–determining regions of Salmonella
enterica
serovar Typhi and serovar
Paratyphi 
A. 
Antimicrob 
Agents
Chemother. 2002;46:3249–52.
8. Atkins BL, Gottlieb T. Emerging drug
resistance and vaccination for typhoid fever
[letter]. JAMA. 1998;279:579–80.
9. Threlfall EJ, Skinner JA, Ward LR.
Detection of decreased in vitro susceptibil-
ity to ciprofloxacin in Salmonella enterica
serotypes Typhi and Paratyphi A. J
Antimicrob Chemother. 2001;48:740–1.
10. Heisig P. High-level fluoroquinolone resist-
ance in a Salmonella typhimurium isolate
due to alterations in both gyrA and gyrB
genes. 
J 
Antimicrob 
Chemother.
1993;32:367–77.
Address for correspondence: Takuya Adachi,
56 Okazawacho, Hodogaya-Ku, Yokohama
240-8555, Japan; fax: +81-45-331-1960; email:
t-adachi@bd5.so-net.ne.jp 
Pygmy Populations
Seronegative for
Marburg Virus
To the Editor: A serosurvey was
conducted in Durba, a mining village
near Watsa, northeastern Democratic
Republic of Congo, the epicenter of
Marburg hemorrhagic fever (MHF)
outbreaks in 1994 and 1998–2000
(1–3). In this survey, Bausch et al.
found a prevalence of anti-Marburg
immunoglobulin (Ig) G of 0.35% (2
of 565) in the nonmining population,
but a prevalence of 3.75% (13 of 347)
in miners. Mine work was an inde-
pendent risk factor for seropositivity
for anti-Marburg IgG (1). Given that
widespread secondary transmission
could not be documented in the
seropositive miners, primary trans-
mission from the unknown reservoir
likely occurred in the mines where
rodent, shrew, bat, and other fauna
were abundant. No evidence of
Marburg virus (MBGV) infection was
found in samples from small mam-
mals, amphibians, and arthropods col-
lected in and around Gorumbwa mine
(R. Swanepoel, pers. comm.); the ori-
gin of the MHF outbreak remained
unknown.
We hypothesized that the MBGV
reservoir’s habitat might not be limit-
ed to gold mines around Durba, but
may exist in caves or forests in the
wider Watsa area. As hunter-gather-
ers, pygmies enter caves for shelter
and are in frequent contact with wild
animals and body fluids of butchered
game. Earlier studies found that pyg-
mies were seropositive for filoviruses
significantly more often than subsis-
tence farmers (for filoviruses [4,5],
for Ebola but not Marburg [6]). We
conducted a seroprevalence study to
verify whether pygmies living in the
Watsa area constitute another popula-
tion at risk for primary transmission
of MBGV.
The Watsa area’s population
(≈180,000) includes 4,000 pygmies
living predominantly in its southern
parts (1). The pygmies live semino-
madically in the forest, occasionally
leaving to exchange goods with the
sedentary Bantu population.
We invited the pygmy population
to meet with our study representatives
at sites 50–90 km from Durba. Three
hundred persons volunteered during a
5-day period. After informed verbal
consent was obtained, the study par-
ticipants were interviewed, and a
blood sample was taken from each
volunteer. For operational reasons, we
excluded children <10 years old.
According to local customs, men
received small quantities of salt and
soap and women received an item of
second-hand clothing as an apprecia-
tion for their efforts. Ethical clearance
was obtained by the ethics committee
of the Institute of Tropical Medicine
in Antwerp and the representative of
the Ministry of Health in Watsa.
The study questionnaire was simi-
lar to one used in the Durba 1999 sur-
vey; we did not maintain a recall peri-
od of 1 year for exposures related to
medical treatment, as this did not
appear to be a meaningful time span
for the pygmies. Procedures for col-
lecting and handling blood samples
were similar to the Durba survey, and
the same laboratory tests were
applied. Serum samples were consid-
ered positive only if they were posi-
tive for Marburg IgG in both enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay and indi-
rect immunofluorescence assay (IFA)
(1).
The study participants originated
from 39 different settlements. Their
median age was 30 years (range
10–75; q1 20, q3 40); half of them
were males. Most study participants
reported activities (hunting 60%,
entering caves 98%) and contacts
with wild animals (rodents 79%, bats
78%, monkeys or apes 99%) thought
to be risk factors for the primary
transmission of filoviruses. Whenever
noticeable 
differences 
existed
between the sexes, men tended to be
exposed more frequently than women,
often significantly so. Pygmies were
significantly more exposed to wild
animals than the nonmining general
population; the difference was partic-
ularly large concerning contact with
bats (Table). From one fourth to one
third of study participants reported a
direct or potential contact with some-
one with a febrile hemorrhagic syn-
drome. Women were more frequently
exposed to these risk factors for sec-
ondary transmission in the household
or community than men, sometimes
significantly so; pygmies were less
exposed to these risk factors than the
nonmining 
general 
population
(Table). Almost all study participants
had been exposed at least once in their
LETTERS
life to invasive modern or traditional
medical treatment, including injec-
tions and scarification, by which an
iatrogenic secondary transmission
could have occurred.
Thirty-seven percent of the study
participants reported having experi-
enced a febrile hemorrhagic syndrome
at least once in their life, men more
often than women (n = 236; 45% ver-
sus 28%, chi-square test: p = 0.006).
All serum samples, however, were
negative for anti-Marburg IgG; the
prevalence of anti-Marburg IgG in the
pygmy population (0.0%; exact bino-
mial one-sided 97.5% confidence
intervals [CI] 0.00%–1.2%) was simi-
lar to that in Durba’s nonmining popu-
lation (0.35%; 95% CI 0.04%–1.3%),
significantly lower than in Durba’s
mining population (3.7%; 95% CI
Emerging Infectious Diseases • www.cdc.gov/eid • Vol. 11, No. 1, January 2005
175
LETTERS
2.0%–6.3%), and as low as, or even
lower than, that in other populations in
sub-Saharan Africa, where a sero-
prevalence was found in 0% to 1.7%
in 15 studies. Only 2 studies from the
Central African Republic and Uganda
found a higher seroprevalence (3.2%
and 4.5%, respectively; all studies are
referenced [1]). In studies conducted
before the 1999 Durba survey, the
presence of anti-Marburg IgG has
been determined by only the less spe-
cific IFA; this may explain why we
have found a lower prevalence in our
study population than reported from
certain other locations in sub-Saharan
Africa.
We reject our study hypothesis that
pygmies residing in the Watsa area are
a second population at risk for MHF
compared with the nonmining seden-
tary population. We conclude that the
absence of anti-Marburg IgG in the
pygmy population reflects the virtual
absence of MBGV circulation in the
reservoir, the absence of the reservoir
in the pygmies’ environment, the
absence of exposure to the reservoir,
or any combination of these. The
MHF outbreaks in Durba and Watsa
in 1994 and 1998–2000 apparently
did not impact the study population.
The frequent occurrence of febrile
hemorrhagic syndrome was almost
certainly due to a different origin than
MBGV and may not have been of
viral origin at all.
An alternative explanation for the
absence of antibodies would be that
the case-fatality proportion was high-
er than observed during the outbreaks
in Durba and Watsa (71%) (3).
However, there is no reason to assume
that pygmies who contract MHF
would die more frequently than dis-
eased gold diggers and their family
members. Access to basic clinical care
is similar in both groups, and this care
has a limited effect on the case-fatali-
ty proportion.
Another alternative explanation
would be that anti-Marburg IgG
wanes and becomes undetectable
soon after infection. However, all 17
survivors of confirmed MHF in the
1994 and 1998–2000 Durba and
Watsa outbreaks with whom we could
follow up are still seropositive
22–102 months after onset of disease
(M. Borchert, unpub. data).
Our study participants were volun-
teers who could reach the meeting
points along the main road with rela-
tive ease. Primary transmission of
MBGV may occur more frequently in
pygmies living deeper in the forest,
but even in those who reached the
meeting point and participated in our
study, the prevalence of risk factors
was very high. Reported exposure
patterns correspond to the traditional
distribution of tasks such as men
hunting and women caring for sick
relatives, which lends credibility to
our interview data. Gonzalez et al. did
not find a significant difference for
the risk of filovirus infection between
pygmies living in savannah and forest
areas (6). That the study used volun-
teers might also have caused sero-
prevalence to be underestimated if
those who rightfully believed they
had had MHF in the past, chose not to
take part in the study. However, the
proportion of study participants
reporting to ever have had a febrile
hemorrhagic syndrome was high, and
MHF was not stigmatized in the study
setting. We therefore believe a selec-
tion bias is unlikely.
Despite the MHF epidemics in
Durba and Watsa in 1994 and
1998–2000, the prevalence of anti-
Marburg IgG in the pygmy population
of Watsa was as low as, or lower than,
that in Durba’s nonmining sedentary
population, and that in most other
populations in sub-Saharan Africa
where serosurveys have been con-
ducted. Infection with MBGV appears
to be rare in the pygmy population of
the Watsa area. During the 1998–2000
outbreak, primary transmission of
MBGV was apparently limited to gold
mines around Durba. While the loca-
tion where primary transmission
occurred now appears to be well
ascertained, the reservoir species at
the origin remains unknown.
Acknowledgments
We thank the study participants for
their trust and availability; the members of
the Watsa Rural Health Zone/Central
Office, particularly Mwimba Arajebo, for
providing demographic data of the Watsa
area; the interviewers who made this inves-
tigation possible despite difficult working
conditions; Daniel G. Bausch for sharing
the database from the 1999 survey in
Durba; and Julius Lutwama for granting
temporary storage of the samples and facil-
itating their shipment to Johannesburg.
The study has been funded by Fonds
voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek –
Vlaanderen (1.5.188.01) and the Frame-
work Agreement between the Belgian
Directorate for Development Co-opera-
tion and the Institute of Tropical
Medicine, Antwerp, Belgium.
Matthias Borchert,*1
Sabue Mulangu,† 
Robert Swanepoel,‡ 
Antoine Tshomba,§ 
Afongenda Afounde,¶ 
Amayo Kulidri,¶ 
Jean-Jacques Muyembe-Tamfum,†
and Patrick Van der Stuyft*
*Institute of Tropical Medicine, Antwerp,
Belgium; 
†Institut 
de 
Recherche
Biomédicale, 
Kinshasa, 
Democratic
Republic of Congo; ‡National Institute for
Communicable Diseases, Johannesburg,
South Africa; §Hôpital Général de Kilo-
Moto, Watsa, Democratic Republic of
Congo; and 
¶Ministry 
of 
Health,
Democratic Republic of Congo
References
1. Bausch DG, Borchert M, Grein T, Roth C,
Swanepoel R, Libande ML, et al. Risk fac-
tors for Marburg hemorrhagic fever,
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Emerg
Infect Dis. 2003;9:1531–7.
176
Emerging Infectious Diseases • www.cdc.gov/eid • Vol. 11, No. 1, January 2005
1Current affiliation: Infectious Disease
Epidemiology Unit, London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, United
Kingdom.
LETTERS
Emerging Infectious Diseases • www.cdc.gov/eid • Vol. 11, No. 1, January 2005
177
2. Bertherat E, Talarmin A, Zeller H.
République Démocratique du Congo: Entre
guerre civile et virus Marburg. Med Trop
(Mars). 1999;59:201–4.
3. Zeller H. Les leçons de l’épidémie à virus
Marburg 
à 
Durba, 
République
Démocratique du Congo (1998–2000).
Med Trop (Mars). 2000;60(2S):23S–6.
4. Bourée P, Bergmann JF. Ebola virus infec-
tion in man: a serological and epidemiolog-
ical survey in the Cameroons. Am J Trop
Med Hyg. 1983;32:1465–6.
5. Johnson ED, Gonzalez JP, Georges A.
Filovirus activity among selected ethnic
groups inhabiting the tropical forest of
equatorial Africa. Trans R Soc Trop Med
Hyg. 1993;87:536–8.
6. Gonzalez JP, Nakoune E, Slenczka W,
Vidal P, Morvan JM. Ebola and Marburg
virus antibody prevalence in selected popu-
lations of the Central African Republic.
Microbes Infect. 2000;2:39–44.
Address for correspondence: Matthias Borchert,
London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, Infectious Diseases Epidemiology
Unit, Keppel Street, London WC1E 7HT,
United Kingdom; fax: 44-20-7299-4720; email:
matthias.borchert@lshtm.ac.uk
Disseminated
Coccidioidomycosis
To the Editor: Coccidioidomy-
cosis, an infection caused by the
dimorphic fungus Coccidioides immi-
tis, is endemic in the southwestern
United States, parts of Mexico, and
Central and South America (1).
Patients with C. immitis infection may
have chronic pneumonia, fungemia,
and extrapulmonary dissemination to
skin, bones, meninges, and other body
sites. The clinical features of coccid-
ioidomycosis may mimic those of
melioidosis, penicilliosis marneffei,
and tuberculosis, which are common-
ly seen in some southeastern Asian
countries, including Taiwan.
A previously healthy, 71-year-old
retired gynecologist from Taiwan, vis-
ited Los Angeles in August 2003 and
traveled to the San Joaquin Valley in
November 2003. He had smoked 1
package of cigarettes daily for 50
years. He noted fever 5 days before
returning to Taiwan on December 1,
2003. He came to a local hospital on
December 4 with a temperature of
39°C and a history of 1 month of night
sweats, productive cough, and weight
loss of 10 kg. Chest radiograph
showed diffuse nodular lung lesions
bilaterally (Figure, panel A). His
leukocyte count was 16.65 x 109/L
(neutrophils 85.6%, lymphocytes
6.2%), and C-reactive protein was
21.5 mg/dL (reference value, <0.8
mg/dL). Empiric antimicrobial drugs
(amoxicillin/clavulanic 
acid 
and
ciprofloxacin) and antituberculosis
therapy (isoniazid, rifampin, ethamb-
utol, and pyrazinamide) were admin-
istered. Blood and sputum specimens
were negative for bacteria; HIV anti-
body test results were negative, but
the fever persisted. A follow-up chest
film showed a left pleural effusion.
The pleural effusion aspirate was
exudative with 3.6 x 109/L leukocytes
(73% neutrophils). Computed tomo-
graphic scan of the patient’s chest
showed collapse of the left lower lung
with central necrosis, bilateral pleural
effusions, and mediastinal lym-
phadenopathy. Pleural biopsy by
video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery
showed no evidence of malignancy,
but heavy lymphoplasmacytic infiltra-
tion and chronic necrotizing granulo-
matous inflammation were found
(Figure, panel C). On December 17,
2003, 30 mg/day prednisolone orally
was prescribed for intermittent fever.
Biopsy material and cultures of blood
samples taken at admission grew an
Figure. A) Chest radiograph shows diffuse nodular lesions in both lungs. B) Chest radi-
ographic scan taken 2 months later shows coalescence of nodular shadows and almost
complete white-out of bilateral lung fields. C) Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the wound
specimen from pleural biopsy site showed spherules of Coccidioides immitis and chronic
necrotizing granulomatous inflammation (400x).
