BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
29 NOVEMBER 1975
PAPERS AND ORIGINALS
Outbreak of Marburg virus disease in Johannesburg
J S S GEAR,
G A CASSEL,
T H BOTHWELL,
R SHER,
M ISAACSON,
J H S GEAR
A J GEAR,
B TRAPPLER,
L CLAUSEN,
A M MEYERS, M C KEW,
G B MILLER,
J SCHNEIDER,
H J KOORNHOF,
E D GOMPERTS,
British Medical Journal, 1975, 4, 489-493
Summary
The first recognised outbreak of Marburg virus disease
in Africa, and the first since the original epidemic in
West Germany and Yugoslavia in 1967, occurred in South
Africa in February 1975. The primary case was in a young
Australian man, who was admitted to the Johannesburg
Hospital after having toured Rhodesia. Two secondary
cases occurred, one being in the first patient's travelling
companion, and the other in a nurse. Features of the
illness
included
high
fever,
myalgia,
vomiting and
diarrhoea,
hepatitis,
a
characteristic
maculopapular
rash,
leucopenia,
thrombocytopenia,
and
a bleeding
tendency. The first patient died on the seventh day from
haemorrhage resulting from a combination of dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation and hepatic failure. The
Department of Medicine, University of the Witwatersrand, and
Johannesburg General Hospital, Johannesburg, South Africa
J S S GEAR, MB, FCPSA, physician
G A CASSEL, MB, FCPSA, registrar
A J GEAR, MB, BCH, registrar
B TRAPPLER, MB, BCH, intern
L CLAUSEN, MB, FCPSA, infection control officer
A M MEYERS, MB, FCPSA, senior physician
M C KEW, FCPSA, MRCP, principal physician
T H BOTHWELL, MD, FRCP, professor of medicine and chief physician
Johannesburg Fever Hospital
R SHER, MB, BCH, medical officer
G B MILLER, MB, DPH, superintendent
J SCHNEIDER, MD, FRCP, consultant physician
School of Pathology, University of the Witwatersrand, and South
African Institute for Medical Research, Johannesburg
H J KOORNHOF, MB, FRCPATH, professor of microbiology
M ISAACSON, MD, DPH, senior microbiologist
E D GOMPERTS, MD, MSC, senior haematologist
Poliomyelitis Research Foundation, Johannesburg
J H S GEAR, MD(HON), FRCP, director
other
two
patients
were
given
vigorous
supportive
treatment and prophylactic heparin and recovered after
an acute phase lasting about seven days. During this
period one developed pancreatitis, the serum amylase
remaining raised until the 32nd day after the onset of the
illness. The
other developed
unilateral
uveitis
after
having been asymptomatic for two months. This persisted
for several weeks and Marburg virus was cultured from
the anterior chamber of the eye.
Introduction
In February 1975 a young Australian man who had been hitch-
hiking through Rhodesia died in the Johannesburg Hospital
after an acute haemorrhagic, feverish illness. Shortly afterwards
his travelling companion and then one of the nurses who had
looked after him fell ill with the same disease. The girls recovered,
and virological studies on all three showed that the illness was
caused by the Marburg virus. The only previously described
outbreak of Marburg virus disease occurred in 1967 in Marburg
and Frankfurt, West Germany, and Belgrade." Vervet monkeys
(Cercopithecus aethiops) imported from Uganda for scientific
purposes were the source of the infection, the primary patients
all having had direct contact with blood, organs, or cell cultures
from these animals. Secondary cases occurred among medical,
paramedical, and lay contacts of the primary patients. In all, 31
people contracted the disease and seven of them died. The virus
was isolated in laboratories in Germany, England, and South
Africa and was shown to be different from all previously known
viruses.2-4
The Johannesburg outbreak provided a unique opportunity
to study the epidemiology of Marburg virus disease in its natural
setting, and detailed epidemiological and virological reports will
follow in due course. In this paper the clinical presentation in
the three patients is described and is compared with that found
in the previous epidemic. In addition, the rationale underlying
the management of the two survivors is discussed.
Case 1
A 20-year-old Australian draughtsman was admitted to the Johannesburg
489
BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
29 NOVEMBER 1975
Day
I
| 2
JI., 3
i
m
Clinical
Myolgia
Vomiting
Diarrhoea
Haemorrhage
Rash
Abdominal pain
40-
Temperature (OC) 39
38-
37
Treatment
Ampicillin
Chloroquine
Chloramphenicol
Fresh-frozen plasma
Platelets
Blood transfusion
IV fluids
Peritoneal dialysis
Investigations
WCC(xlO9/1)
Platelets (x 10/ 1)
ESR(mm in first h)
Plasma fibrinogen (9 /I )
FDP (mg/I)
Partial thromboplastin time (min)
Serum urea (mmol /)
Serum creatinine (,umol /1)
SGOT (units)
SGPT (units)
LDH (units)
Alkaline phosphatose (KA units)
Serum bilirubin (pmol /1)
3.7
8
2.
6b6 65 95 165
90 low
6-6
b164 21-9
354 504
3280
2200
729
66
20-6
171(T)
66-7
rI
1
17
17
Feb 1975
0-38
>40
>2
24-6
b28
27-8
684
umol/l (4 mg/100 ml) and the urea level to 16-4 mmol/l (99 mg/100 ml).
WCC was 6-5
109/1 and platelets were 90
109/1. SGOT and SGPT were
3280 and 2200 units respectively, alkaline phosphatase was 20-6 King-
Armstrong (KA) units, and the serum bilirubin, which had been 17-1 jtmol/l
(1-0 mg/100 ml) on admission, was 66-7 tLmol/l (3-9 mg/100 ml).
Despite the failure to find malaria parasites on repeated peripheral blood
smears a course of chloroquine injections was begun. Atypical lymphocytes
were present and some polymorphonuclear leucocytes showed the features
of an acquired Pelger-Huet anomaly. These findings were thought to suggest
a viral infection. Blood cultures and agglutination tests for typhoid fever,
brucellosis, and rickettsial infections gave negative results. Stool examination
Day
Clinical
Myalgia
Diarrhoea
Vomiting
Abdominal pain
Rash
40
Temperature (°C)
39
38-
37
-
Treatment
Heparin
Lassa antiserum
IV fluids
Investigations
WCC (x lO9/1 )
ESR (mm in first h)
Platelets (xI0/ )
Partial thromboplastin time(s)
FDP
Plasma fibrinogen(g/l)
SGOT (units)
SGPT (units)
Serum amylase (SC units)
FIG 1-Clinical and laboratory data in case 1.
N = no
Hospital on 15 February 1975 (fig 1). He had been ill for fourdays, complaining
initially of malaise, rigors, and profuse sweating. Two days later frontal
headache, nausea, and vomiting began, and on the day of admission he
developed severe myalgia, which was generalised but affected mainly the
lumbosacral region, and painful eyes.
During the first nine days of February he and his companion had travelled
widely throughout Rhodesia,
often by hitch-hiking,
visiting
Salisbury,
Kariba Dam, Victoria Falls, Gwaai River, Bulawayo, Zimbabwe, and Beit
Bridge. On their return to South Africa they visited Margate on the Natal
coast, where the patient became ill. He had previously had good health.
Examination on admission showed an ill-looking young man with an oral
temperature of 39°C, a pulse rate of 100/min, and a respiratory rate of 24/min.
There was no pallor, cyanosis, or jaundice and the blood pressure was 120/70
mm Hg. The conjuctivae were injected and the throat showed the features of
an acute pharyngitis. Slight lymphadenopathy was present in the left axilla.
The lungs and heart were normal, the liver was not enlarged, and the spleen
was not palpable. An erythematous, tender papule was present on the right
flank. On direct questioning he remembered being stung or bitten by an
unknown agent in that region six days before the onset of his illness while
sitting on a roadside near Wankie. The rest of the examination showed
nothing abnormal.
Investigations showed haemoglobin
13 2 g/dl; leucocyte count (WCC)
3-7 x 109/1; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; Wintrobe) 8 mm in the
first hour; blood urea and serum creatinine levels normal; no malaria or
trypanosomal parasites on peripheral blood smears; cerebrospinal fluid and
chest x-ray films normal.
A provisional diagnosis of typhoid fever was made and treatment with
intravenous ampicillin begun. Next morning severe watery diarrhoea without
blood or excess mucus developed, and later that day the vomitus became
obviously blood-stained. The temperature remained
raised. During
the
next day the patient's condition deteriorated alarmingly. Profuse vomiting
and diarrhoea persisted, and both vomitus and stools contained large amounts
of blood. He complained for the first time of diffuse abdominal pain and was
found to be lethargic and drowsy. A confluent, non-itchy, erythematous
maculopapular rash appeared on the trunk, neck, face, and arms. At the time
urinary output was low and the serum creatinine level had risen to 354
2-1
13
101
1 8
99
32
N
275
42
31
1-6
b2
N
2-26
110
b4
92
2-8
'6
145
52
3.39
92
107
1-51
26-
230
32
N
3-44
1-15
205
f671
3.51
1-5-
-tI
4-73
107---
128
MI
1 20 21122123124 [2512b 127 [28
1 2
1 3
17
35
N
27C
180
195
132
22
505
14
10
Feb- March 1975
Clinical and laboratory data in case 2. For fibrinogen degradationproducts
rmal; vertical arrows indicate raised values.
showed numerous bipolar Gram-negative rods compatible with, but not
diagnostic of, Yersinia pestis. This together with the fact that the patient had
visited an area in Rhodesia endemic for plague suggested the possibility of
septicaemic plague. As neither plague nor typhoid fever was excluded at this
stage chloramphenicol was added to treatment. Fresh-frozen plasma was
given for the bleeding.
By the next morning bleeding from the bowel was life-threatening. The
plasma fibrinogen was 0-38 g/l (normal 2-0-4-0 g/l),5 fibrinogen degradation
products (FDP; Thrombowellcotest)
were over 40 mg/i (normal under
10 mg/l), activated partial thromboplastin time (PTT; Thrombofax) was
longer than 120 s (normal 29-40 s), and the prothrombin index was 51% of
normal. The findings were thought to be those of disseminated intravascular
coagulation, probably aggravated by failure of synthesis of clotting factors by
the liver. Fresh blood, fresh-frozen plasma, and platelet-rich infusions did
not lessen the bleeding. He was now anuric with a serum creatinine of 628
/Lmol/l (7 1 mg/100 ml) and a urea of 24-6 mmol/l (148 mg/100 ml). Peritoneal
dialysis was begun. That evening a massive haematemesis and haemoptysis
was followed by cardiorespiratory arrest. Resuscitation was unsuccessful.
Necropsy confirmed the immediate cause of death as profuse gastroin-
testinal haemorrhage and bleeding into the lungs. The spleen and lymph
nodes in the left axilla were slightly enlarged. The liver was pale but not
enlarged. Microscopically the liver showed patchy but extensive degeneration
of hepatocytes, most pronounced in the midzones of the lobules but also
affecting the centrilobular and periportal areas. The affected cells showed
severe eosinophilic change and eosinophilic masses resembling the Council-
man bodies typically found in yellow fever. There was little fatty change, and
clearly defined intranuclear inclusions were not prominent. Sections of the
spleen showed relatively acellular pulp and depletion of the lymphocytes of
the Malpighian corpuscles. Many lymphocytes showed pyknosis and frag-
mentation of the nuclei, and many round or oval bodies, possibly pyknotic
fragments, and much nuclear dust were seen. Similar changes were noted in
the lymph nodes. Kidney sections showed pronounced tubular necrosis and
some fibrin deposition in the glomeruli.
Although the cause of the fulminant haemorrhagic illness was not known
then, the
clinical presentation, natural history, and liver histopathology,
together with the fact that the patient had visited an area in Rhodesia where
490
I
3-7-
5.0
22
530
--.219-
4.61
100
235
50
5-8
41
-74
165
4-
44
09C
N
3-23
69
130
136
BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
29 NOVEMBER 1975
the rodent reservoir of Lassa fever, Mastomys natalensis, was known to be
prevalent, raised the possibility that we might have been dealing with Lassa
fever. When his travelling companion (case 2) became ill she was therefore
looked after using the strict barrier-nursing techniques recommended by the
World Health Organisation.6 In addition, all the primary contacts of case 1
-35 doctors and nurses-were isolated in the Johannesburg Fever Hospital,
and less close contacts were kept under daily surveillance.
Case 2
This patient, a 19-year-old girl, was the travelling companion of case 1.
She had been at his side constantly from the onset of his illness until his
death. Two days after he died she became ill with malaise, headache, and
backache, mainly in the lumbosacral region. She had previously been well
(fig 2).
The most striking finding on admission two days later (22 February) was a
temperature of 40 C. Pulse was 92!min, and blood pressure 110/70 mm Hg.
Specifically, there was no
pallor, jaundice,
cyanosis,
rash, conjunctival
injection, or enanthema on the soft and hard palates. She was tender in both
axillae but the lymph nodes were not enlarged. The heart and lungs were
normal, the liver was not enlarged, and the spleen was not palpable.
Investigations showed a haemoglobin 15-0 g/dl; WCC 2-1 x
109/1 (74°O
neutrophils); platelets 101
109/l; ESR 13 mm in the first hour. The
peripheral smear showed atypical "viral" lymphocytes, and some polymor-
phonuclear leucocytes showed the acquired Pelger-Huet anomaly. She was
thought to be suffering from the same illness as case 1.
Next day the fever persisted and she continued to complain of painful
muscles and joints. The WCC remainedlowandadirectCoombstestresultwas
positive. Serum fibrinogen, FDPs, and PTT were normal. Nevertheless, in
view of the severe disseminated intravascular coagulation that had developed
in case 1 an intravenous loading dose of 2000 units heparin was given prophy-
lactically, followed by a constant infusion of 10 000 units over the first 24
hours. Thereafter the dose was monitored according to the PTT. Blisters
developed on her buttock and thigh but these were thought to be due to the
use of a hot-water bottle before admission. The next day she developed upper
abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and watery diarrhoea without blood or
excess mucus. In addition she became more lethargic and drowsy. Rebound
tenderness was elicited in the epigastrium and to the right of the umbilicus.
Acute pancreatitis was suspected and was confirmed by a serum amylase level
of 92 Street-Close (SC) units. The serum transaminase levels (SGOT and
SGPT) were also moderately raised. Because of the possibility that she may
have been suffering from Lassa fever she was given 250 ml Lassa fever
antiserum intravenously, which had kindly been provided by the Hospital of
Tropical Diseases, London, through Professor A W Woodruff. Shortly
afterwards a maculopapular erythematous rash appeared on the trunk and
491
arms. This lasted for 48 hours, and some days later slight desquamation
occurred at the sites of the rash.
During the next two days the patient remained feverish, diarrhoea and
vomiting persisted, and the epigastric pain became progressively worse. The
serum amylase level rose to 295 Street-Close units. Serum FDP levels were
raised and 1251-fibrinogen was injected to determine the rate of fibrinogen
clearance.' This was studied over 200 hours starting on day 7 and found to be
normal (five days; normal range four to six days). The dose of heparin was
raised and by the next day the FDPs had returned to normal. Fifty-two hours
after receiving the specific antiserum her temperature returned to normal.
Firstly the diarrhoea and then the vomiting settled, and apart from persistent
epigastric pain she began to feel better. Thereafter there was a steady clinical
and biochemical improvement, the serum transaminase levels and amylase
level returning to normal on days 16 and 32 respectively. Heparin was
discontinued on the 10th day. She felt completely well 10 days after becoming
ill but was not discharged for another 30 days for public health reasons and
because of the raised serum amylase levels.
Vigorous supportive treatment was given from the day of admission.
Parenteral fluids ( ± 4 1 daily) were administered from the outset and serum
electrolytes and urinary output were maintained within normal limits
throughout the
illness. During the period of symptomatic pancreatitis
nasogastric suction was also applied. Fever was controlled by fanning and
tepid sponging. Hydroxyzine was used as a sedative and antiemetic and
pentazocine as an analgesic.
Day-to-day management was provided by the nurses and doctors who had
been exposed to case 1 and who were already isolated in the fever hospital.
It was from this group that the third case came.
Case 3
A 20-year-old nursing sister on the staff of the Johannesburg Hospital
looked after the first patient on the penultimate and ultimate nights of his
illness. Barrier nursing was not practised during the initial two hours of the
first night but thereafter a gown, gloves, and mask were worn at all times. She
did not recall handling a bedpan or urine or blood specimens from the patient
during the unprotected period. She was present during the attempted
resuscitation, which included endotracheal intubation, bronchial suctioning,
and external cardiac massage, but wore protective clothing. After the patient
died she attempted to console his companion (case 2), and during this time,
while not wearing gloves, handled several wet facial tissues that had been
used by her. Eight days later she nursed this patient for one six-hour shift,
wearing protective clothing, including goggles. After working for about five
hours she fainted and then vomited. She then felt better and completed the
duty (fig 3). Twenty-four hours later, while on night duty, she complained
of malaise and lower backache, which caused her to go off duty at midnight.
Day
Clinical
Myalgia
Diarrhoea
Abdominal pain
Rash
Haemorrhaqe
Vomiting
40,
Temperature (OC) 39
38
37
Treatment
Heparin
Lassa antiserum
Fresh-frozen plasma
Platelets
IV fluids
Investigations
WCC(xl0/l)
ESR(mm in first h)
Platelets (x 0d/ l )
Plasma fibrinogen (q/l)
FDP
Partial thromboplastin time (s)
SGOT( units)
SGPT (units)
Serum amylase (SCunits)
0-4 _
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
19
K10
1
12
13
14
15
19
32
1
4
5
8
45
30
51
12
9
N 1250 190 b5
lb6 120 120. 49
94
58
120 -116-
147 --270 293 355
1264 2-93
_2-1013.07 2-34 4-17 4L694-73 4-25 5-25
__N-
-.------
_-=-
30
31
2 9
35
94
87
71
48
34
29
253
23
30
46
96 210K)0690
092046b0320
175
43
31
12
l1
23
25
91
155 610830
410 390
255
107
79
31
10
I I
10
5
20
19
14
20
28
23
17
21
9
17
15 35
_24
2-8
I
2
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
II
12
13
14
18
31
Feb-March 1975
FIG 3-Clinical and laboratory data
in case 3. For fibrinogen degradation
products N = normal; vertical arrows
indicate raised values.
492
By the next morning (28 February 1975) the backache was severe and other
muscles were also slightly painful. She felt cold and had a mild headache.
On examination her oral temperature was found to be 37-5 C (it rose to
38-5°C during the morning), pulse was 82 beats/min, and blood pressure was
110/70 mm Hg. The muscles of the right shoulder girdle were tender to
palpation and the joints painful on movement, particularly the knees. The
conjunctivae were injected but there was no rash or enanthema. There was no
jaundice, pallor, or cyanosis. Slight tenderness was isoted in both axillae, and
the lymph nodes in the left axilla were slightly enlarged. The liver was not
enlarged and the spleen was not palpable.
"Baseline" blood tests four days before admission had shown normal
values. On admission there was a moderate leucopenia (WCC 3-8
K
109/1;
79O% were neutrophils) and the ESR was 5 mm in the first hour. Platelet
count was 250 x
109/l. Peripheral smears showed atypical "viral" lympho-
cytes, and an acquired Pelger-Huet anomaly of the polymorphonuclear
leucocytes was observed.
Seruml amylase, transaminase
levels, and the
coagulation profile were all normal. As in case 2 the direct Coombs' test
result was positive. It was thought that the patient was suffering from the
same disease as cases
1 and 2. The following day her temperature remained
above 38°C, leucocytes fell to 2 9
109/l, and the SGOT began to rise. In
view of the apparent success with heparin in preventing a severe disseminated
intravascular coagulation syndrome in case 2 a similar regimen was instituted.
Initially, satisfactory prolongation of the PTT was achieved with about
14 000 units daily.
The next afternoon the patient was given 250 ml Lassa fever antiserum
(kindly supplied by the Centre for Disease Control, Atlanta, USA), which
was well tolerated. The rate of "25I-fibrinogen clearance, determined7 over
120 hours starting on day 3, was found to be midly increased (three days).
At about this time she developed watery diarrhoea and abdominal cramps.
The abdomen was found to be slightly tender. That evening slight but
persistent bleeding was noted from a venepuncture site, and small amounts of
blood were present in both urine and stool. A rise in the level of FDPs
suggested the presence of a disseminated intravascular coagulation in addition
to the heparin effect. By midnight the platelet count had fallen to 49
109/1
and she was given 7 units of fresh platelet concentrates during the night and
6 more the next day. In the morning the skin appeared suffused but there
was no obvious rash.
Fever,
severe diarrhoea, mild nausea, and
slight
myalgia and arthralgia persisted. In addition there was biochemical evidence
of worsening hepatitis. On the evening of the next day, the fifth day of her
illness, a maculopapular erythematous rash appeared on the trunk and arms.
Her conjunctivae remained injected and she complained of a painful scratchy
throat; however, no enanthema was present. She was lethargic and somewhat
drowsy. The next day she complained of severe nausea and began to vomit. A
nasogastric tube was passed and suction instituted. Postural dizziness was
present. SGOT was 1020 units.
On day 7 of the illness the patient began to improve and her temperature
settled. By this time there was a strong suspicion, based on preliminary
virological studies, that the illness was not Lassa fever but was due to the
Marburg virus. A unit (250 ml) of specific Marburg virus antiserum (kindly
supplied by Behringwerke, West Germany) was available, but in view of her
improvement it was withheld. Vomiting and diarrhoea became less trouble-
some and stopped on the 10th day of the illness. The serum enzyme levels
improved. After 21 days she was completely well and biochemically normal.
She was discharged.
Two months later she developed a painful right eye. Uveitis was diagnosed
and the Marburg virus was cultured from fluid aspirated from the anterior
chamber. She was treated with steroid and atropine drops and the condition
subsided over several weeks. A repeat viral culture
10 weeks later was
negative.
Virus studies
Virus
studies
were
carried
out
at
the
Poliomyelitis
Research
Foundation (PRF), Johannesburg, and
at the Centre for Disease
Control (CDC), Atlanta.
Throat swabs and blood were collected in case 1 on the day of the
patient's admission to hospital. The suspensions prepared from them
were inoculated at the PRF into baby mice and tissue cultures of
vervet monkey kidney. At necropsy specimens of various organs were
collected and suspensions of liver, spleen, kidney, and brain prepared
at the PRF. These were inoculated on 20 February into tissue cultures
of vervet monkey kidney. Histological sections were prepared from
the same specimens and examined the following day. The liver showed
patchy midzonal necrosis. Because of these findings Dr David Sencer,
director of the CDC, was consulted by telephone. He immediately
arranged to send special containers for the transport of aliquots of the
tissue suspensions to Atlanta by air. The suspensions arrived at the
CDC on 1 March.
On 3 March Dr Isobel Spence, of the PRF, on electron micro-
scopical examination of tissue retrieved from paraffin blocks of liver,
spleen, and lung, observed bodies and arrays in the cytoplasm of cells
that resembled virus particles. On 4 March at the CDC Dr Herta
Wulff obtained a negative fluorescent antibody test result for Lassa
BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
29 NOVEMBER 1975
fever, and the next day structures indistinguishable from Marburg
virus
particles" were observed by Dr F A Murphy on electron
microscopy of vero cell cultures inoculated with the original sus-
pensions. Later the same day Dr Herta Wulff confirmed their identity
using a fluorescent antibody technique. These findings were im-
mediately transmitted to Johannesburg. On 6 March the coverslip
preparations from the original tissue cultures stained with haematoxylin
and eosin showed cytoplasmic inclusion bodies similar to those of
Marburg virus infection.
In the meantime the other two patients (cases 2 and 3) had become
ill. Throat swabs, blood, urine, and faeces were collected at regular
intervals during the course of their illness. Suspensions were prepared
and inoculated into vervet monkey kidney tissue cultures, and after
14 days of observation the coverslips were collected, fixed, and stained
with haematoxylin and eosin, and in each case inclusions similar to
those produced by Marburg virus were observed.
Sera separated from the blood collected early in the illness in case 2
and before its onset in case 3 were compared by Mrs E Rossouw at the
PRF in indirect immunofluorescence tests for antibody against the
virus from case
1 in vervet monkey kidney coverslip preparations.
These showed the absence of antibodies in early specimens and their
presence in convalescent specimens of blood from cases 2 and 3
against the virus from case 1, thus confirming that all three patients
had had the same virus infection.
Final confirmation that the outbreak was due to Marburg virus was
obtained by Dr Herta Wulff when she showed that the results given
by fluorescent antibody tests on sera taken from cases 2 and 3 at
intervals after the onset of the illness showed an almost identical
pattern of rise in titre against the virus from case 1 and against the
Popp virus isolated in the original outbreak in Marburg.
Discussion
Apart from meningococcal, staphylococcal, or streptococcal
septicaemia, which may occur anywhere, the diseases that should
be considered as possible causes of an acute haemorrhagic fever
contracted in tropical Africa include the viral infections yellow
fever, chikungunya fever, Rift Valley fever, Lassa fever, and
Marburg virus disease, the protozoal infections malaria and
trypanosomiasis, and septicaemic plague. The clinical presen-
tation in our three patients, together with the negative peripheral
blood
smears and blood
cultures and the histopathological
findings in the liver of the patient who died, strongly suggested
that we were dealing with either Lassa fever or Marburg virus
disease. Which of the two was not apparent early on in the
outbreak, since the symptoms and signs associated with them are
similar. 9 Both may cause hepatitis and hepatic necrosis, and both
are often fatal. In view of the greater likelihood that the young
Australians were exposed during their travels to the rodent
reservoir of Lassa fever, M natalensis, than to the primary source
of Marburg virus disease, C aethiops, Lassa fever was initially
considered the more likely cause of the Johannesburg outbreak.
During the course of the illness in case 3, however, preliminary
results
of the
virological
studies
became
available,
which
implicated Marburg virus as the cause; this was subsequently
confirmed.
The incubation period of the illness in the 1967 outbreak was
estimated to be three to nine days.' Probably our first patient
contracted the disease during his trip through Rhodesia and
infected his companion. Only in case 3 was it possible to get a
reasonably accurate idea of the incubation period, which seemed
to be seven or eight days. The clinical picture was remarkably
uniform in the three patients and was in almost all respects
similar to that in the 1967 epidemic.' Early complaints were
malaise, headache, and myalgia, which was generalised but
affected mainly the lumbosacral region. Nausea, vomiting, watery
diarrhoea, and abdominal pain developed a few days later. A
characteristic
maculopapular
rash
against
a
background
of
pronounced erythema appeared on the trunk, face, and arms on
the fifth or sixth day of the illness. This rash was not itchy and
faded after three or four days in the two survivors, in one of
whom it was followed some days later by fine desquamation.
BRITISH MEDICAL JOURNAL
29 NOVEMBER
1975
493
RASH AS DIAGNOSTIC FEATURE
As in the original description of the disease, the rash was a
major diagnostic feature in the clinical recognition of the illness.
A high fever was present at the time of admission in all three
patients.
It ran a remittent or continuous course and lasted
five to seven days. The relative bradycardia noted in the earlier
epidemic was again evident, as were the leucopenia and low
erythrocyte
sedimentation
rate.
The
acquired
Pelger-Huet
anomaly of the neutrophils together with atypical plasmacytoid
lymphocytes was
a
distinctive feature in
all three patients.
Lethargy, drowsiness, and postural dizziness were notable when
the illness was at its height. Less striking manifestations were
slight axillary lymphadenopathy and conjunctival injection. The
dark red enanthema on the soft and hard palates that was con-
sistently found in the 1967 outbreak was not seen in any of our
patients. The first patient complained of a sore throat, but
the appearances were those of an acutely inflamed pharynx
rather than a dark red discoloration.
Profuse bleeding from the gastrointestinal tract and later the
lungs occurred in the fatal case.
It began on the sixth day,
rapidly increased in severity, and was the eventual cause of
death. Investigation showed the features of a severe disseminated
intravascular coagulation, probably aggravated by
failure of
synthesis by the liver of coagulation factors. The other two
patients were treated prophylactically with heparin intravenously
from an early stage and showed only mild disseminated intra-
vascular coagulation. There was, in addition, some indirect
evidence of mild bone marrow suppression. Haemorrhage was
prominent in seven of the 31 patients in the first epidemic of
Marburg
virus
disease.'
Profound
thrombocytopenia
was
recorded in these patients, but no proof of disseminated intra-
vascular coagulation was found in the limited coagulation studies
reported.
Biochemical evidence of hepatitis was present in
all our
patients, with SGOT levels as great as or even greater than
SGPT levels; this is similar to the earlier experience.' Only the
patient who died was jaundiced, and at necropsy there was
patchy but extensive degeneration of the hepatocytes. Obvious
pancreatitis occurred in our second patient and was one of the
dominant features of her illness. The serum amylase levels
remained high for 32 days. Slightly raised serum amylase levels
were found in the other surviving patient, and a low-grade
pancreatitis may have contributed to her abdominal pain.
CONTROL OF HAEMORRHAGE
In view of the uncontrollable haemorrhage
in case
1,
it
seemed important to attempt to prevent this complication in the
subsequent patients. Disseminated intravascular coagulation is
presumably initiated in this disease by virus-induced endothelial
damage and disseminated cellular breakdown, resulting in the
release of tissue thromboplastins.' ° At present it is not possible
to prevent this from occurring, but it was hoped that by giving
heparin early in the course of the disease consequent intravascular
coagulation could be reduced in severity. In fact, both patients
did at one stage of their illness develop evidence of disseminated
intravascular coagulation, but in the first it was detectable only
on laboratory testing, while in the second it manifested with a
mild and short-lived bleeding tendency. The usefulness of
heparin in established disseminated intravascular coagulation is
the subject of controversy and results reported are equivocal.I' -14
It was nevertheless felt justifiable to use heparin prophylactically
in the second and third patients in an attempt to prevent the full
evolution of a consumptive coagulopathy similar to the one that
had caused the death of the first patient. The degree to which this
treatment modified their illnesses is not known. The relatively
benign course of the disease in the two girls, however, was in
striking contrast to the fulminant haemorrhagic illness to which
the
first
patient
succumbed. The
results
suggest
that the
prophylactic use of heparin in severe viral illnesses associated
with haemorrhage may be warranted.
The increased serum amylase level for a month in case 2
raised the possibility of persistent viral infection in this patient.
No virus, however, was cultured from her stools during this
period. The third patient, who had appeared to recover com-
pletely,
developed
uveitis
80
days
after
the
onset
of the
illness and Marburg
virus was
cultured from the
anterior
chamber. The condition settled over several weeks and a repeat
viral culture two and a half months later was negative. In this
context it is of interest that virus was cultured from the seminal
fluid of one of the victims of the original Marburg outbreak 83
days after the onset of the illness.9 These various observations
indicate that the virus can persist for at least two to three
months after the initial attack.
One final point merits comment. Limiting the Johannesburg
outbreak of Marburg virus disease to three persons with two
recovering was a team effort that spread far beyond the boun-
daries
of the
countries
immediately
involved.
Particularly
noteworthy was the way
in which
expert advice, precious
antiserum, and virological laboratory support were immediately
made available at short notice. The Centre for Disease Control
in the United States; the London School of Tropical Medicine,
and
Behringwerke
in West Germany
all made
invaluable
contributions.
We wish to pay tribute to the members of the nursing staff who
attended to the three patients and to the many members of the
laboratory technical staff, who carried out their duties willingly and
conscientiously despite the considerable
risks. Unstinting back-up
support was also provided by Dr J McMurdo, superintendent of the
Johannesburg Hospital, and his administrative staff, by Professor
A H Smith, medical officer of health, Johannesburg City Health
Department, by the Secretary for Health and his regional Director in
Johannesburg, and by Dr M Shapiro, director of the South African
Blood Transfusion Service. We also thank Professor A W Woodruff,
of the Hospital for Tropical diseases, London, for expert advice and
for supplying Lassa antiserum, and Professor W Mohr, who, through
the good offices of Professors R Siegert and G A Martini, arranged
for the supply of Marburg antiserum by Professor H G Shrick, of
Behringwerke. For their decisive help in the elucidation of the cause
of the illness we are indeed grateful to Dr David Sencer, director of
the Centre for Disease Control in Atlanta, and his staff. In particular,
we are indebted to Drs W R Dowdle, R Hufakker, and F H Murphy,
to Dr Herta Wulff, who identified the infectious agent as Marburg
virus, and to Dr Lyle Conrad for his invaluable co-operation in the
epidemiological studies of the outbreak.
Requests for reprints should be addressed to Professor T H Both-
well, Department of Medicine, Medical School, Hospital Street,
Johannesburg, South Africa.
References
1Martini, G, Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and
Hygiene, 1969, 63, 295.
2Smith, C E G, et al, Latncet, 1967, 2, 1119.
3 Siegert, R, in Modern Trends in Medical Virology-2, ed R B Heath and
A P Waterson, p 204. London, Butterworths, 1970.
4 Malherbe, H, and Strickland-Cholmley, M, in Marburg Virus Disease, ed
G A Martini and R Siegert, p 188. New York, Springer, 1971.
5 Ellis, B C, and Stransky, A, Jfournal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine,
1961, 58, 477.
6 Weekly Epidemiological Record, 1974, 41, 341.
Regoeczi, E, British Journal of Haematology, 1971, 20, 649.
8 Murphy, F A, et al, Laboratory Investigation, 1971, 24, 279.
9 Monath, T P, WHO Chronicle, 1974, 28, 212.
10 McKay, D G, and Margaretten, W, Archives of Internal Medicine, 1967,
120, 129.
1
Corrigan, J J, jun, and Jordan, C M, New England Journal of Medicine,
1970, 283, 778.
12 Katz, J, Lurie, A, and Kaplan, B, Lancet, 1969, 2, 700.
13 Abildgaard, C F,3Journal of Pediatrics, 1969, 74, 163.
14 Lasch, H G, Thrombosis et Diathesis Haemorrhagica, 1969, suppi No 36,
p 28.
